From
the New York Times, I'm Michael Babaro.
This is the daily.
I am standing in the rotunda of the
United States capital where, as of just
a few moments ago, the federal
government has officially begun to shut
down. It is by far the most audacious
act of resistance by Democrats against
President Trump's secondterm agenda. And
the question now is whether the
Democrats gamble will pay off or whether
it is going to backfire.
Today, the story of how the Democrats
got to this point and what their
decisionmaking looked like inside the
capital in the hours leading up to this
shutdown. It's Wednesday, October 1st.
Okay. Testing one, two, three. Testing
one, two, three. Michael Barbaro. Good
morning.
>> Testing 345.
Good morning, Mary.
>> Tell me where we are right now.
>> We're on the, according to Rachel
Kuster, Daily Editor, Washington
Resident, the east side of the United
States Capital, looking at the dome.
It's a humid morning here. Tuesday,
10:20 a.m. Government shutdown day. if
things proceed in the direction we
believe they will for the rest of the
day. And we're about to head into the
Capitol to go meet with our colleague
Katie Edmonson. She's a Times
congressional correspondent. She's going
to talk us through really the road to
this moment to shut down. So, she's
waiting for us and we got to go head
through a gauntlet of security.
>> Want to go first? I'll go behind you.
>> Thank you.
You guys are all set. Do you know how to
get there?
>> No, we don't.
>> Yep. Around the corner. Elevator to
three.
>> Thank you.
>> You, too.
>> All right, we're going to get We're
going to get in this elevator. Yeah.
[Applause]
[Music]
>> This is the Santa Press Gallery.
Quiet in here.
Hello, Katie.
>> Welcome. Welcome to our little Don't
know
>> an actual inerson interview. Sorry that
I'm so sweaty.
>> Hi.
>> But you look like a alive. You look
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I feel I feel fine by
now. Yeah. The the betting is um now how
long the shutdown is going to be. We've
shifted. Yeah.
>> I think there really is just a feeling
of an inevitability here. So I'm less
like guarding for breakthrough
negotiations that are going to pop all
of a sudden. And instead I think it's
going to be pretty wrote like each side
steps up to the mic and points the
finger at the other side and
>> right we're sort of in go from there.
>> We're in pre-shutdown mode but there's
not ambiguity about shutdown
>> which is really kind of striking.
>> Yeah, it is. I mean what the last actual
shutdown and that was a partial shutdown
was 2018 2019 and obviously in between
that I've covered a lot of stops and
starts with spending bills where it
seemed like maybe we were going to
teeter off the cliff for a day a couple
of days and you know congressional
leaders in both parties always sort of
like yanked their parties back from the
cliff and that is very much not the
feeling now in large part because of
what happened back in March I think this
time
>> and remind me of the situation that we
were in back them.
>> Well, back in March, we had another
government funding deadline that
lawmakers had to pass some sort of
spending bill to avert a shutdown. And
Michael, if you remember that there was
a lot of angst among Democrats at the
time over whether or not to fund the
government because this was at the
height of Doge. This was at the height
of the Trump administration taking
really aggressive steps to claw back
money that Congress had already
appropriated. the executive branch
really throwing its weight around in a
way that made a lot of lawmakers
uncomfortable, but certainly that
infuriated Democrats,
>> right? There's a school of thought that
this was the Democrats moment and this
was their leverage to stand up to the
Trump administration.
>> That's right. And we saw that in the
House. Uh Speaker Mike Johnson put
forward a clean, short-term funding
bill, and we saw every single Democrat
in the House vote against that bill. And
the expectation, I think, was that
something similar was going to happen in
the Senate. That they did not want to
lend their votes to help Republicans
advance a spending bill to keep business
going as usual. If you remember,
Michael, obviously just given the math,
in the Senate, you need 60 votes to
clear any sort of spending bill. And
Republicans control 53 votes. So for any
spending bill to move forward, it has to
have some sort of Democratic support,
right? But Senator Chuck Schumer of New
York, the Democratic leader, surprised a
lot of his own members when he basically
reversed himself in a
>> at the very last minute
>> at the very last minute in a private
lunchon right before the Senate was set
to vote to advance the spending bill.
>> I believe it is my job to make the best
choice for the country to minimize the
harms to the American people. and he
made the case that it actually was going
to be worse for Democrats if they didn't
allow this spending bill to advance.
>> As bad as passing the CR is, as I said,
allowing Donald Trump to take even much
more power via a government shutdown is
a far worse option. He made the argument
that by shutting down the government,
they were going to seed President Trump
and his deputies far too much power
essentially to shut down some parts of
the government and maybe never reopen
it.
>> Therefore, I will vote to keep the
government open and not shut it down.
>> And of course, Michael, you'll remember
that there was a huge backlash to that
decision. It was a decision that
blindsided a lot of House Democrats who
again had voted to block that bill in
the House. And it blindsided and really
infuriated a lot of Democratic
activists, voters out in the country.
And for Schumer, some some of the worst
blowback he's ever received in his
career. You had people openly
questioning whether he was up to the job
of leading Democrats here in the Senate.
You had some activist groups calling for
him to step down. You even had Hakee
Jeff, the Democratic leader in the
House, being unwilling to answer the
question, should Senator Schumer remain
the Democratic leader in the Senate?
That's how deep the fissurers were in
that moment within the Democratic party.
>> It was an extraordinary moment of
backlash,
>> right? And so now, all these months
later, we get to what seems like deja vu
all over again,
>> right? To shut down or not to shut down.
And again, we're in a situation where
the House already passed the short-term
spending bill. And so all of the focus
once again comes down to what happens in
the Senate. But you know, Michael, when
you talk to Senator Schumer now, leader
Schumer now, and you talk to Democrats,
they will make the case that they feel
they are in uh a very different moment
now than they were back in March.
>> And exactly how?
>> Well, they point to three big data
points here. Uh the first two relating
to healthcare. So number one, since they
voted to fund the government in March,
Republicans used their governing
trifecta to push through the so-called
big beautiful bill that carried these
steep cuts to Medicaid.
>> Right.
>> Right. So Democrats are making the
argument that American voters in fact
despise the Medicaid cuts that are
contained in that legislation and want
Democrats in Congress to push back. And
so one of their asks is that if you
Republicans want us as Democrats to lend
our votes to keep the government open,
then we want you to reverse the Medicaid
cuts contained within the big beautiful
bill.
>> A huge huge ask given how central that
is to the president's marquee domestic
policy bill.
>> Right.
>> What's number two?
>> Number two also healthcare related. At
the end of the year, there are a number
of Obamacare tax subsidies that are set
to expire. Now, these are tax credits
that Democrats passed into law when they
had the majority in Congress. They're
set to expire at the end of the year,
and it's projected that about 4 million
people over the next decade will lose
healthcare coverage if those are not
extended, and that prices, healthcare
prices are going to go up for about 22
additional million people.
>> Right. And the Democrats use numbers
like premiums rising 114% as a result of
this. It's projected to jack up health
care prices pretty significantly for
families, for older couples. And so,
Democrats are making the argument to tie
extending those subsidies to the
government spending bill in part because
time is of the essence. People are going
to the marketplace to lock in their
healthcare plans as we speak.
>> Okay. And what's the third issue? So the
third issue is the White House's
campaign to unilaterally rescend money
to claw back money that Congress already
approved. And again, Michael, you and I
both know the White House has been
picking and choosing which funds they
want to disperse, let go to the agencies
that Congress wanted that funding to go
to. And in some cases, they have frozen
or canled funding entirely, especially
when it comes to foreign aid.
>> Right. And thereby essentially
circumventing the will of Congress.
>> That's right. that has infuriated both
Democrats and Republicans, but Democrats
in particular have zeroed in on this
issue in this funding fight because part
of their argument is how can you expect
us to agree to any sort of bipartisan
funding agreement if then your deputies
on the back end take back money that we
wanted to go out?
>> Got it. And what do Republicans say to
the idea of these three demands being
suddenly tethered to the act of funding
the government that these three ration
would be used to shut it down?
>> Well, the case that Republicans are
making is look, we have just offered a
clean funding extension, right? We're
not asking for you to vote for any
Republican policies. We're not even
asking you to endorse any spending cuts.
We just want to keep the government
open. We are not going to be held
hostage for over a trillion dollars in
new spending on a continuing resolution.
>> And Republicans like Senator John Thun
of South Dakota, the majority leader,
have accused Democrats of trying to hold
the government hostage essentially in
order to get the votes for their
Democratic policies. They, as you all
know, have voted during the time they
had the majority 13 different times and
when Biden was in the White House on
short-term continuing resolutions 13
different times.
>> And to what degree would Thoon be
correct in the sense that clearly
someone like Senator Schumer has gone on
a journey here, right? from we will not
use our power in the minority to take a
stand against the Trump administration
back in March to now saying actually we
we will that essentially this is a
protest against the Trump
administration's agenda. Well, Thoon has
made the case that Republicans when they
were in the minority in the Senate voted
several times for these types of clean
stop gap bills that they did not try to
add any Republican policies to these
bills. And
>> I think what's changed is President
Trump is in the White House. That's what
this is about. This is politics and
there isn't any substantive reason why
there ought to be a government shutdown.
>> Essentially, at the end of the day,
Democrats are saying, "Sure, but we are
in such uncharted times now, right?
Given everything the White House is
doing, if you want our votes, sorry,
you're going to have to negotiate with
us and this is our asking price.
>> Shut down. This is totally avoidable. It
is a decision they're going to have to
make. And if the government shuts down,
it is on the Senate Democrats.
>> The back and forth between the Democrats
and the Republicans here has devolved
pretty quickly,
>> considerably. Yeah. I mean, we started
the week with President Trump meeting
congressional leaders at the White House
to discuss funding negotiations. By all
accounts, it seemed to be a cordial but
ultimately fruitless meeting.
>> But hours after that meeting, President
Trump posted a pretty crude and
inflammatory video on social media.
>> Look guys, there's no way to sugarcoat
it. Nobody likes Democrats anymore.
>> It's a deep fake video. So, this was an
AI generated video. Not even black
people want to vote for us anymore. Even
Latinos hate us.
>> Depicting Representative Hakee Jeff
wearing a cartoon mustache and a
sombrero and has him mute in the video.
And then it sort of edited Senator
Schumer's voice to say things that he
did not say, including that Democrats
want to fund health care for illegal
immigrants. Uh which is a pretty
baseless claim, I should add. They won't
realize we're just a bunch of woke
pieces of, you know, at least for a
while until they they learn English and
they realize they hate us, too.
>> And all of this is set to mariachi music
in the background.
>> That video kind of said this is not the
time for negotiation.
>> Well, and we're not taking you
seriously.
>> So, given everything you've just laid
out here, if a shutdown happens,
what are the repercussions and how
quickly we're going to feel them? Well,
shutdowns are typically pretty
politically unpopular and that's because
they hit a lot of Americans in different
ways, right? You have federal employees
who are furoughed, who are asked to
continue coming into work, but who won't
receive pay until the shutdown is over.
You have things like national parks
closing down. But I think this
potentially could be a shutdown in
uncharted territory because of the way
that the White House is approaching it.
President Trump and his top deputies,
including Russ Vote, who is the director
of the budget office, have indicated
that they want to make this as painful
as possible and for Democrats to bear
the political blame for that pain.
President Trump earlier today in the
Oval Office said that with a shutdown,
quote, we can get rid of a lot of things
that we didn't want and they'd be
Democrat things. And Michael, I think
it's important to note that the fear of
the Trump administration weaponizing a
shutdown was actually one of the reasons
why leader Schumer and Democrats
initially back in March said, "Okay,
let's continue to fund the government."
But in the intervening months, they've
said, "Look, we voted to fund the
government. We voted to avert a
shutdown, and you continued doing all of
this stuff anyway. You continued to
rescend funding that we approved. You
continued to lay off federal workers.
You're going to do this whether or not
we vote to fund the government.
>> Right. In other words, what the
Democrats feared most during a shutdown
in their minds was happening in the
absence of a shutdown.
>> That's right.
>> Okay. So, just to distill all this, it
feels like Democrats are saying, having
been burned the last time, there's
nothing to lose
from taking a principled stand against
this administration and basically using
the shutdown as a very public and they'd
argue principled, policyoriented act of
protest against the Trump
administration. And the Republicans in
turn are saying good luck with that.
That's exactly right. But I also think,
Michael, what you described also
underscores why this could be one, why I
think a shutdown feels inevitable here,
and two, why a shutdown potentially
could last a while.
>> What happens now? We're talking to you
on Tuesday morning. There's a full day
of logistics ahead of us that precede a
shutdown. So the rank and file of both
parties are going to meet. Democrats are
going to meet for a strategy meeting, a
messaging meeting over lunch.
Republicans are going to do the same
thing. The point of these lunchons are
really to make sure that everyone is on
the same page. And then a few hours
after that, we are going to have a pair
of votes on the Senate floor. There's
going to be one vote on the Republican
bill that the House already passed to
keep the government open. There's going
to be one vote on what the Democratic
counter offer is. And Michael, will we
expect both of those to fail and then by
11:59 p.m. as the clock moves from 11:59
to 12:00 a.m. the government will shut
down.
>> Okay. Well, Kitty, with your permission,
we are going to annoyingly follow you
around the capital all day. So, let's
head to these lunches.
>> Let's do it. Let's go stand in some
hallways outside of closed door rooms
>> and elevators. Um, okay.
>> How much is it really about healthcare
or finally the Senate Democrats saying
enough on all kinds of fronts?
>> Well, the only way to address the health
care issue is to take a stand.
>> I care about my constituents and my
constituents need help right now. I
survived a stroke 3 years ago. When
rural health clinics start closing and
and hospitals close and you have an
episode like I did, time is not on your
side. If you can't get to a facility,
you will die. It's plain and simple.
>> What I want is pretty simple. I just
don't want insurance premiums to go up
in people by 75%. I want the president
to obey the law.
>> They're willing to help out their
billionaire buddies. All these cuts to
healthcare were so that they could fund
tax breaks for billionaires and
billionaire corporations. It's time for
Democrats to stand up and say no more.
>> Could you get your lunch then?
>> Okay. Thanks.
>> Republicans will leave at the same time
roughly speaking if you get another
couple Republican voices and toss them
in the mix.
>> I I don't know. I can't figure out what
my dem colleagues are doing by hurting
the very people right now they say they
want to help. My plea to them is like,
hey, let's let's work on this stuff, but
don't take hostage all of these working
people in America. Beautiful bill,
right? So, you both inflicted and now
you're saying
>> don't inflict anything. I mean, no,
listen. We got $50 billion in additional
funding for rural healthcare in that
bill that starts from my state right
now. What I do not want to see happen is
that money not be available. That those
grants not go out. Medicaid
reimbursements not happen. That's what's
going to happen if they shut down the
government. I just don't know why you do
that. I just
>> Do you have any sympathy
shut down or is it rubbish you?
The high cost of healthcare is a
tremendous issue. You're not going to
solve it between today and tomorrow. I
mean, just reality, you're not going to
fix it between today and tomorrow. Okay.
>> Katie, how would you describe the
emerging vibes from these interactions
with the lawmakers?
>> I think what we've heard so far is very
different than what we heard back in
March when Democrats were having the
same conversation. There was a lot of
agonizing going into these lunches over
what exactly they should do. And I think
you've heard most Democrats that you've
spoken to, that I've spoken to, be
pretty steadfast in their resolve to
pick this fight.
>> Mhm.
>> All right. Well, Katie, thank you for
all your time this afternoon.
>> You're free to go. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
It's almost 4:30. We just hopped into an
elevator are headed down to the second
floor of the capital because Senator
Schumer's office just let us know that
he is going to make himself available to
us for about 5 10 minutes to talk about
the decision he faces
and why he is pursuing this shutdown.
the minority leader office.
>> So right, walk straight down.
>> Thank you.
And we're walking into the minority
leader office.
>> Hey there, Alex told us that the
>> one.
>> Sure.
>> So we are back to back on meetings. So
just 5 minutes.
>> 7 minutes.
>> I'm sorry. It's very busy.
>> Thank you for making time for us,
Senator.
>> Okay. So where are we each sitting? We
don't have much time, so
>> let's go fast.
>> So, we are literally 40 minutes away
from the vote.
>> Yes.
>> And that's where I want to start.
>> Senator, you're a changed man when it
comes to shutdowns. Right. Back in
March, you were the face of the party
saying, "We're not going to do a
shutdown. It's not worth it. It's too
dangerous." Now, you're the face of the
party saying, "It's time to do a
shutdown based on the situation you're
in." That's a huge change. And the way
you're describing it is it's about
affordable care act subsidies. It's
about
>> three things have happened between then
and now. Then we wanted to give them a
chance to see if they could work with
us.
>> First, Trump has decimated healthcare
>> between then and now. Second, we had
time to prepare. We've been preparing
for this Democrats House and Senate
united for months. We have focused on
health care and costs as our issue. But
we have also gotten the American people
to understand how bad this is if you
look at the polling and other kinds of
things.
>> You say you weren't ready and the
country wasn't ready for this kind of
standoff last time.
>> No, we didn't have much time last time
because we only knew on Saturday that
they were going to pass their bill and
we only had till Tuesday. And the third
thing that happened is they did
impoundments, they did recisions. And so
what's the point of agreeing to a budget
process if they then unilaterally can
undo them? So those three things were
very significant changes and I think I
did the right decision back in March and
this is the right decision now given
those changes.
>> What you're describing in a sense if
you're a certain kind of Democrat seems
kind of narrow. You're talking about
process recisions. But let me finish
this because here's my question is what
is really happening here. The Democrats
you leading them are you unplugging a
government that you all find to be
abusing its power? Look, there's no
question this government is abusing its
power. And I do believe that health care
and costs are the number one thing
bothering people. But I think if we're
able to win the argument and get some
changes there, it will thwart Trump in
other areas as well because
>> door into the rest.
>> Correct. Well put.
>> Okay. If you believe that, I do need to
point you to this polling the Times did
that says 2% of Americans treat
healthcare as a number one problem they
face right now. That means many other
problems are first. You're putting a lot
of eggs in that basket as your front
door.
>> Make two points. One, that poll shows
cost of living is number one. And when
you break down the cost of living,
health care is at the very top of the
list. Okay? And second, it's now going
to be much more apparent because
starting tomorrow,
millions and millions of American
families are going to get notice that
their increases are going up. We thought
it was about $400 a month, which is too
damn much already. That's $5,000 a year
for a middle class family. But a new
estimate by Kaiser says it's going to go
up $1,400 a month.
>> Make it a very big issue for people.
>> Get that bill. They're going to say,
"What the hell happened?" and we are
going to be there constantly,
relentlessly saying it's because the
Republicans have decimated healthcare.
So I think the bottom line is that
healthc care itself is a very prominent
issue now subsumed maybe in your poll in
costs but it's going to be even more
prominent in the next few weeks and
we're going to make it more. That's part
of our job because this as you said is a
door.
>> Let me ask you a provocative question
Senator. How much for you is this at all
personal? And let me just be very
specific. You got a tremendous amount of
blowback. You just argued why you didn't
want the
>> Yeah.
>> shutdown last time, but you got a lot of
blowback.
>> Yes, I knew.
>> I knew I would. But it was the right
thing to do then. And now this is the
right thing to do based on what the
American people need. My job is to take
people's problems and anguish and try to
solve them. That's what we're trying to
do here. On the personal front, Trump's
video, this deep fake, when that comes
across your desk, and I know you must
have looked at it.
>> Yeah, just last night. I've been
fighting for this for a long time.
>> Does that offend you? And does that tell
you
>> what?
>> It tells me that the Republicans are not
taking this issue very seriously. It
tells me that they're trying to
intimidate us. This doesn't intimidate
me. I mean, gee whiz. Um, but
>> does it piss did it piss you off? No,
>> it made me think even less of Trump.
He's like a 5-year-old.
>> My last question is, in the past, these
have always been about cutting
government spending. You may oversee one
of the first and only shutdowns to be
about increasing government spending.
It's undoing some of the bad things the
Republicans have done. But I think that
the bottom line is but that makes it e
better for us because we're doing
something to actually help people and
the people are going to rally behind us.
>> You sure about that?
>> You never can be sure, but it's as good
a shot as we're going to get.
>> I just That's an important phrase. It's
as good a shot as we're going to get.
This may be the only leverage you have.
>> Well, who know? It's certainly the best
leverage we've had thus far. Much
stronger leverage than it was in March.
Yep,
>> Senator.
>> Thank you.
>> Appreciate it.
>> That beeping at the end means that the
voting is about to start.
[Music]
>> Mr. President,
>> Democrat leader,
>> we in a quorum.
>> No. So, at around 8:00 p.m., uh,
>> I move to proceed to the motion to
reconsider the vote on passage of S2882.
>> Both the Democratic and the Republican
spending bills that would have kept the
government funded.
>> The clerk will call the role.
>> Both went down in flames.
>> The 60 vote threshold, having not been
received, achieved, the bill upon
reconsideration is not passed.
>> And so now there are no more votes
scheduled tonight. And a government
shutdown is no longer theoretical. It is
an absolute certainty. And because that
is now the reality, there's one last
person we want to talk to today. And
that is Carl Hulse. He is the Times most
senior congressional correspondent. I
think honestly around here, he's
considered the dean of the congressional
correspondents. And with several decades
of covering this institution under his
belt, we wanted the benefit of his
perspective on all this.
>> Testing one, two, three.
>> Carl,
>> sir,
>> you ready?
>> I'm ready.
>> Please make your way into our extremely
improvised studio here.
>> Carl,
when I sat down to write how long you've
been covering Congress, I wrote 30
years. 40 years.
>> Okay. So, I was off by 10 years.
>> Yeah.
>> I was here for Clinton Gingri shutdowns.
>> So, how are you thinking about what just
happened here tonight? I think the
Democrats are a different party. And
part of the reason is just practical.
They have lost the people who were in
the states, the red and purple states
that were in the past anxious about
shutdowns. They're really worried that
they're going to turn off their voters
there. Well, the people in those states,
>> the senators,
>> yes, those Democrats are gone. You know,
>> someone remind me who are we talking
about?
>> Montana, Indiana, Florida, Missouri,
North Dakota.
>> The kind of purplish red flank of the
Democratic Party,
>> right? Those seats have turned over. So,
the complexion, the makeup of the
Democratic caucus in the Senate is
different than it has been in the past.
Would those senators from those states,
>> yes,
>> have tolerated the shutdown?
>> No. They would have been freaking out.
They'd be yelling at Chuck Schumer, "We
can't do this. You're going to kill us.
We can't run for reelection." Well, now
these people are sitting here, but they
are a different ideological stripe.
>> And how much did Trump change them? I
mean, obviously the political map
changed, but how much in this moment has
Trump changed those who even remain?
>> Yeah. No, I I had one tonight, the
Democrats say, "Trump is lawless. Why
should I
>> abide by any version of
>> anything that he wants to do?" And on a
sort of a practical level from spending
and appropriations, why go along with
the spending deal when they're just
going to do whatever they want anyway?
>> Why not us? Why don't we basically start
breaking the rules, too?
>> Well, I don't know if they're they're
not breaking the rules, but they're kind
of breaking their past practice. They've
always been super cautious, Democrats,
about shutting down the government
always. The Republicans were willing to
do that because they thought it played
with their base. Now, the Democrats are
looking at their base. Their base is
saying, "Hey, you need to stand up."
>> Right? We think of Democrats, and you're
hinting at this, Carl, as the party that
by its own lights safeguards the
government.
>> They like government. Yeah. But they're
also out there saying, "Hey, we we are
for the government, but we have to shut
down the government to show that we're
for it." It can be a tough cell,
>> right?
>> Right. And this is what they're going to
have to contend with.
>> Well, let's talk about that cell. I
mean, we spoke with Senator Schumer, and
clearly he has a plan. The Democrats
have a plan to pin this shutdown on the
president and the Republicans, portray
them as the party, unwilling to meet
them halfway, and they're going to
really put forth this case that the
people in charge don't care about your
healthcare. And they clearly would like
to rebalance the national political
discourse,
but it feels hard to compete with
President Trump's megaphone and his
ability to dominate the message around
any moment. And so, won't the early
stages of this be Trump saying, "Well,
let's just look at the vote." And the
vote was the Democrats wouldn't vote to
continue spending. Yeah, I think it's
tough for the Democrats, especially at
the start. I do. They're the ones who
did not provide the votes. And Trump not
only has a big megaphone, he uses it
like almost hourly. Right. Right. So,
he's got a good opportunity to beat on
the Democrats. I do think it's kind of
interesting in a way to hear the
Republicans and Trump talk about how
essential the government is now, right?
They're they're really building up the
role of the government. Maybe they may
come to regret some of those statements,
but they think they've got the Democrats
right where they want them. You guys
just voted to shut down the government.
We're going to lay off a bunch of people
and it's all going to be your fault. But
you never know how this is going to play
out. You really don't. I want to just
have you meditate for a minute on where
the Democrats are in this journey that
you started talking about at the
beginning. Parties seem to change
slowly, but then all of a sudden it's
very clear that they've changed. That's
been the story of the Republicans under
Trump. They're not at all the party that
they were before he came around. And
maybe we're at the beginning of a
meaningful and lasting change for the
Democratic party where countering Trump
means it's willing to do things it would
have never done in the past.
I think that's
>> Does this foretell this moment change?
>> I I do. I think that, you know, they've
been radicalized in some ways by Trump's
actions and they think that they have to
do things that are extraordinary to stop
him. They can't be doing business as
usual and their voters aren't going to
stand for that. I Chuck Schumer learned
a tough lesson.
>> Yeah. Back in March. And I do think that
this is a gamble because it could
totally blow up in their face. But it
could also reaffirm, if this works out
for them, that they can take bold steps
to fight Trump and that their
constituents will support them and that
it won't cost them politically and it
could actually advantage them
[Music]
>> and they would no longer just be kind of
the bystander victims of Trumpism,
>> right? And you know, they're making a
big statement here. We'll see how long
they stick with it though. They've caved
quickly in the past.
>> Carl, thank you. Really appreciate it.
>> Thanks for coming here to the US capital
where we do our work.
>> Our pleasure.
[Music]
>> Going down.
>> Oh, we have to hit the floor.
>> Oh jeez. Is it late? You think our
brains are fried?
>> We're done.
>> So, it is now 12:30 a.m. on Wednesday
morning and we're walking out of the
capital, which is pretty much empty
except for a handful of security guards
and cleaning crews, which as of this
morning are not being paid anymore.
The plan is for more than 400,000
federal workers to be furled in the
coming days. And for some of them, it
may be worse than that. They may be
fired. And that's really the story of
the shutdown that began here in this
building this morning. It's going to
start here and then it is going to
radiate out across the entire city of
Washington DC and then the entire
country.
Good night, sir.
>> Good night. You have a nice evening.
>> You, too. Thank you.
>> Good luck getting through this.
>> Not the first time.
>> Not the last time.
[Music]
That's a wrap. That's
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
I'm thrilled to be here this morning to
address the senior leadership of what is
once again known around the world as the
Department of War.
>> In an unusual speech to hundreds of the
country's most senior military officials
on Tuesday, President Trump said that he
had instructed his defense secretary
Pete Heg to use American cities as a
training ground for the US military. And
I told Pete, we should use some of these
dangerous cities as training grounds for
our military. National Guard, but
military. The surprise remark offers a
new context for Trump's controversial
decision to deploy the National Guard to
cities across the country, including so
far Los Angeles, Washington DC, and
Portland, Oregon. During the event for
which commanders had been summoned from
around the world, Hegth complained about
overweight soldiers and commanders
across the military. It's tiring to look
out at combat formations or really any
formation and see fat troops. Likewise,
it's completely unacceptable to see fat
generals and admirals in the halls of
the Pentagon and leading commands around
the country and the world. It's a bad
look. and he warned the officials that
they must sign on to his agenda of
ridding the military of philosophies
like DEI or they should quit their jobs.
But if the words I'm speaking today are
making your heart sink,
then you should do the honorable thing
and resign.
We would thank you for your service.
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson, Carlos Prito, Austa Cherved, and
Eric Krupkkey. It was edited by Rachel
Quester, and Liz Oalen. Contains music
by Marian Lozano, Dan Powell, Alicia
Etup, and Pat McCusker, and was
engineered by Chris Wood. Special thanks
to Robert Jimson, Michael Gold, and
Annie Carney.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Bubaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]